Wiki reorg: AnV Page & Parachain Protocol (#4774)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn/learn-parachains-protocol.md

title: Parachains' Protocol Overview
sidebar_label: Protocol Overview
description: High level view of actors and protocols involved in running parachains on Polkadot.
keywords:
  [
    parachains,
    application-specific,
    sharding,
    protocol,
    validator,
    collator,
    nominator,
    AnV,
    availability,
    validity,
  ]
slug: ../learn-parachains-protocol
---

:::info

This page is a summary of the
[Protocol Overview chapter in **The Polkadot Parachain Host Implementer's Guide**](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot/book/protocol-overview.html)
and the

> [Availability and Validity (AnV) chapter in **The Polkadot Protocol Specification**](https://spec.polkadot.network/#chapter-anv).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Availability and Validity (AnV) chapter in **The Polkadot Protocol Specification**](https://spec.polkadot.network/chapter-anv).
```

:::

The Parachains' Protocol aims to carry a parachain's block from authoring to inclusion through a
process that can be carried out repeatedly and in parallel for each parachain connected to the Relay
Chain. The protocol allows the network to be efficiently sharded among parachains while maintaining

> strong security guarantees. The Availability and Validity (AnV) Protocol essentially describes the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
strong security guarantees. The Availability and Validity (AnV) Protocol describes the
```

> Parachain Protocol from another perspective (i.e. availability and validity; more about this later

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parachain Protocol from the perspective of availability and validity.
```

the {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} network. From a security
standpoint, security is based on having at least one honest validator either among parachain
validators or secondary checker (more about this later on).

## Protocols' Summary

### Parachain Protocol

The parachain protocol is divided into two main phases:

- [**Inclusion Pipeline**](#inclusion-pipeline): Collators send parachain blocks (parablocks) with
  PoV to Validators. Validators verify if the parablocks follow the state transition rules of the
  parachain and sign statements that can have a positive or negative outcome. With enough positive
  statements, the block is added to the Relay Chain, but is still pending approval.
- [**Approval Process**](#approval-process): Validators perform additional checks that, if positive,
  allow the parablock to be approved.

The figure below shows a representation of a parachain with collators and validators. The figure
also shows the journey of a parachain block (white square) through the Inclusion Pipeline and the
Approval Process.

![parachain-protocol-summary](../assets/parachain-protocol-summary.png)

> ### AnV Protocol

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Availability and Validity (AnV) Protocol
```

validators. Note the parablock after secondary checks is shown as a square with a white background a
yellow border enclosing a "P", and three white ticks (one for each secondary check). Approved
para-blocks are shown as yellow squares that become grey.

![parachain-approval-process](../assets/parachain-approval-process.png)

### Assignments & Secondary Checks

Having a bad parablock on a fork of the relay chain is not catastrophic as long as the block is not
approved and finalized by the finality gadget
[GRANDPA](./learn-consensus.md/#finality-gadget-grandpa). If the block is not finalized, the fork on
the chain containing that block can be ignored in favor of another fork containing good blocks.
Dealing with a bad parablock includes the following stages:

- Detection: the bad block must be detected by honest validators.
- Escalation: the honest validators must start a [dispute](#disputes).
- Consequences: all involved malicious validators are slashed.

The result of the dispute must be transplantable to all other forks so that malicious validators are
slashed in all possible histories and so that honest validators will ignore any forks containing
that parablock.

> :::info Parablocks vs Relay-Chain blocks

Reviewer: nit: 

```suggestion
:::info Parablocks vs. Relay Chain Blocks
```
